{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 Helvetica;}}\f0\fs24\pard\fs48\b OpSec for Mom\b0\fs24\par\fs28\i Open source, Apache, and cloud-native habits for everyday security.\i0\fs24\par\parLast week I asked my mom where she keeps her passwords. She said, "In my head. Mostly." That is exactly why OpSec for Mom exists.\parOperational security does not need to be scary or technical. It is a set of calm, repeatable habits that protect your devices, accounts, and home. Think of it like locking the doors before bed.\par\par\fs32\b Why open source, Apache, and cloud-native ideas matter\b0\fs24\parOpen source communities and Apache projects succeed because they are transparent, tested by many people, and improved quickly. Cloud-native systems focus on resilience and recovery, not just prevention. Those same ideas work at home:\par{\pard\fi-360\li720\tx720 \bullet\tab Transparency: Use tools that are well documented and widely reviewed.\par}{\pard\fi-360\li720\tx720 \bullet\tab Repeatability: Simple routines beat complicated one-time fixes.\par}{\pard\fi-360\li720\tx720 \bullet\tab Resilience: Assume mistakes happen and make recovery easy.\par}\par\b Insert Figure 1: digital-home-map.png\b0\parFigure 1. Your devices connect through the router. One weak link can affect the whole home.\par\par\fs32\b Start with the foundation\b0\fs24\parMost security problems disappear if you consistently do the basics. The base of the pyramid does the heavy lifting.\par\b Insert Figure 2: security-habits-pyramid.png\b0\parFigure 2. Start with updates and passwords, then build up to backups and advanced tools.\par\par\fs32\b A quick 15-minute setup\b0\fs24\parIf you only have a few minutes, this five-step checklist covers most everyday risk.\par\b Insert Figure 3: 15-minute-setup-flow.png\b0\parFigure 3. Five quick wins that most people can do in one sitting.\par\par\fs32\b Everyday checklists\b0\fs24\par\fs28\b Laptop\b0\fs24\par{\pard\fi-360\li720\tx720 \bullet\tab Turn on automatic updates for the operating system and browser.\par}{\pard\fi-360\li720\tx720 \bullet\tab Enable full disk encryption.\par}{\pard\fi-360\li720\tx720 \bullet\tab Use a standard account for daily work, not the admin account.\par}\par\fs28\b Phone\b0\fs24\par{\pard\fi-360\li720\tx720 \bullet\tab Use a real passcode, not a simple pattern.\par}{\pard\fi-360\li720\tx720 \bullet\tab Enable find my device in case it is lost.\par}{\pard\fi-360\li720\tx720 \bullet\tab Only install apps from official stores.\par}\par\fs28\b Accounts\b0\fs24\par{\pard\fi-360\li720\tx720 \bullet\tab Use a password manager so every account has a unique password.\par}{\pard\fi-360\li720\tx720 \bullet\tab Turn on two-factor authentication, starting with email.\par}{\pard\fi-360\li720\tx720 \bullet\tab Store recovery codes in a safe place.\par}\b Insert Figure 4: account-protection-stack.png\b0\parFigure 4. Layered account security: password manager, 2FA, and recovery methods.\par\par\fs28\b Smart home\b0\fs24\par{\pard\fi-360\li720\tx720 \bullet\tab Change default passwords on devices.\par}{\pard\fi-360\li720\tx720 \bullet\tab Put smart devices on a separate guest or IoT network.\par}{\pard\fi-360\li720\tx720 \bullet\tab Unplug devices you do not use.\par}\b Insert Figure 5: smart-home-segmentation.png\b0\parFigure 5. Keep smart devices separate from phones and laptops.\par\par\fs28\b Backups\b0\fs24\par{\pard\fi-360\li720\tx720 \bullet\tab Keep one cloud backup and one local copy.\par}{\pard\fi-360\li720\tx720 \bullet\tab Test the backup once a month.\par}{\pard\fi-360\li720\tx720 \bullet\tab Backups are recovery, not just storage.\par}\b Insert Figure 6: backup-loop.png\b0\parFigure 6. A simple backup cycle that protects files and photos.\par\par\fs32\b The point is calm, not fear\b0\fs24\parSecurity is not about paranoia. It is about freedom - the freedom to use tech without constant worry. If you help a parent, a friend, or yourself set up these basics, you are already doing good OpSec.\par\parIf you want help putting this into practice for your home or team, that is the kind of collaboration we already do at haiphen.io. Learn more at https://haiphen.io/#collaborate.\par}